and once you are done with the proof at
some point don't forget to as
always use your absolutely magnificent
easy stamp
you can find it on stem merge a huge
thanks to brienne for sponsoring this
video
[Music]
good morning fellow mathematicians
welcome back to another video
finally after such a long time we are
going to take a look at another
hard exam and this time it's an
australian university exam
first year exam namely calculus 2
basically advanced
multivariable calculus and ordinary
differential equations
and you might ask yourself why i would
consider
something like this calculus 2 basically
as a hard
exam but there's a reason behind it
because
basically everyone failed this thing in
their first year of university and the
reasons for that we are going to discuss
at the end of the video
but before that i have a special guest
with me would you please introduce
yourself tom
hello maths fans your favorite oxford
professor here
helping jens to solve what he claims is
a
hard exam but before we get stuck into
the first question
do make sure to head over to my channel
tomrocks
maths to see what i get up to there's a
good chance you may even recognize
me from a few number five videos thank
you very much for the nice and spicy
introduction mr crawford
but before we dive into the main video
don't forget to check out
stem merge all the merch you can see
during the video today you can find over
on stem much check it out like the
levitating globe right here or other
things you are going to see during the
video we
brought out a new product which is
pretty amazing a bunch of new products
other than that don't forget to also
watch our charity event from christmas
it got by pretty unappreciated in terms
of views which
i cannot really understand so please
check it out for the love of god
please check it out we are doing this
for a good cause and i wanted to get
more views because ad revenue
turns directly into donations so yeah
please watch it
other than that main structure of the
video as always
we are going to talk about a bit of
background information then we are going
to go through
all of the exercises one after another
going to give you outlines of
um basically the the steps you need to
take to solve the
exercises and at the end we are going to
discuss why so many people failed in the
first place
and what happened exactly to not make
too many people fail at the end of the
day
and as always you can download the whole
exam by using the link at the top of the
description you can find it there also
check out today's sponsor pray and we're
kind enough to sponsor yet another video
here on this channel more information at
the end of the video
so as a first year exam you might
imagine that a lot of people are going
to participate
in this whole thing so the person who
sent me the exam via email told me that
around 150 students actually
participated
in this exam thing is nearly all of them
failed there's a reason for that which
we are going to discuss
at the end of the video but if you take
a look at this exam
and the time you had for this exam
of two hours you might notice that oh we
got a bunch of questions here
and you got two hours of time for that i
mean
for first year student who is not yet
used to many
exams during their university life this
could pose a real problem
and it did not only pose a real problem
for nearly all students but also for a
bronze medalist
imo participant he won a bronze medal
in an imo competition international
mathematics olympiad
but still failed in this exam which
really says a lot about
how hard this actually was and i really
wouldn't consider it to be hard it's
just the sheer amount of work you need
to put in in order for you to pass this
exam
and now without any further ado we are
going to dive right into the questions
and see
what this exam actually consists of and
the first part is going to be done by my
boy
tom would you please proceed question
one asks us to solve the initial value
problem
d y by dt
is equal to y times
one minus y all divided by
2 minus y and the initial condition is y
of 0
is equal to minus 1.
so our starting point with any problem
like this is going to be to separate the
variables
so we want to take all of the y terms
and put them on the left hand side
so that gives us the integral of 2
minus y divided by y
one minus y d y
is equal to the integral
of d t now the t integral we can do
directly that's quite straightforward
so that will just be t plus a
constant let's call it c and then the y
integral what we want to do here is turn
this quite complicated fraction
into a simpler set of fractions added
together
so that's going to be using partial
fractions
so when we do this this will turn into
the integral of 2 over y
plus 1 over 1 minus y
d y and that's equal to t
plus c so now we have a much
simpler integral for y and we can do
this
because the first term will give us a
log so that's 2 times the natural log
of y the second term is another log
but i have to remember the minus sign
because when i differentiate 1 minus y
here
i'm going to get 1 over 1 minus y and
the chain rule says to carry that minus
through to get that and that's all equal
to now
t plus c
now we want to tidy this up a little bit
so we put the logs together
so the 2 becomes a squared up here
and then we've got log of y squared
over one minus y using our
rules or laws of logs and that's equal
to
t plus c so finally
we can exponentiate both sides so take e
to the power of both sides to give us y
squared over 1 minus y
must be equal to some constant a
times e to the t
now all we have to do is use the initial
condition given over here which says
that when t
is naught y must be -1
so when t is naught that gives us a
so we just plug in y is minus one so
then we would get
one over one minus minus one is two
so a is a half from this
so a is a half and so our final solution
then is going to be
given by y squared over 1 minus y is
equal to a half
e to the t so one more piece of
information the exam actually came with
extra paper for the students to write on
so they could use this space and also a
blank page at next one
that's why you might notice that i'm
skipping from page four to page six
for example here so the second exercise
basically is going to deal with the
gradient
so let us go into the exercise so we
have someone sailing with a boat
and at some point a volcano is going to
erupt
and the volcano is situated at the
origin zero zero shortly after the
eruption the temperature at the point
xua
on the surface of the lagoon is given by
the function t of x comma y
is equal to something something quotient
of x and y
where t is measured in degrees and x and
y are measured in kilometers
so the first part of the exercise is
going to ask
for if ushi's boat is located at 2 1 in
which direction should she travel
such that the temperature is decreasing
most rapidly give the answer as an exact
third and my initial thought here was to
basically use the gradient because the
gradient
is always the slope of the steepest
ascent basically of a function ascend
means ascending so in the positive
direction but
we want to decrease the temperature most
rapidly
meaning we want to find the slope of the
steepest
descent for this we are just going to
take the negative gradient of our
function t
well and the gradient is just being
defined as
our components partially differentiated
with respect to the
component because um our t is going to
be composed of some x and y coordinate
meaning our gradient or our negative
gradient is just negative at first we
have the partial differential
in x of our function f that we're having
up here okay this this right here is
just our function
okay or t whatever you want to call it
and then the partial differential in one
of our function f up here and then we
are simply going to compute the partial
differential
and at the end we want to find out um
what it is at the point decorate it at
points so you are basically just going
to plug 2 and 1 into the x and y
coordinates respectively and then you
are done it's it's really
straightforward actually
second part of the exercise is saying
that ushi's boat is not traveling in the
direction that we wanted her to go
but she's rather traveling in the
direction of 7 and 12
at 13 meters per second when it is at
the position to 1
what will the range of change of the
temperature be
at that instant meaning we can't use the
gradient anymore but we rather have to
use because we want to find out the
slope in a certain direction meaning we
have to
make use of the directional derivative
thing is i'm not certain here if we
have to use as the direction vector just
7 and 12 or if we have to use the
difference or the
the distance vector basically between
7 12 and then negative 2
comma 1 meaning overall this is going to
result in
5 comma 11. i'm not certain about that
but
one of those two it definitely is so
please leave some
comments down there below and tell me
which one it's it's probably going to be
and the directional derivative is
basically just going to be defined as
the
gradient of the function multiplied with
the vector
let's just give this new vector a name
like v for example
and if we were to write everything out
using the directional derivative we are
going to get that the directional
derivative
in this vector v of t is hence nothing
but
basically our gradient of our t
multiplied with the vector components in
itself or in the scalar product you
should rather say
and this is just going to result in the
partial derivative in
our components of t multiplied with the
um with the entries basically of the
vector
so v1 and then we are going to add to it
just the second part just a simple
scalar scalar product basically in a
product of two vectors
and this basically concludes the second
exercise for question three
we are given a vector function so
f is equal to x
minus y as its first component
the i component and then for the j
component
we have x y then the first part of the
question
asks us to show that f is not
conservative
so if it is conservative so suppose
if f is
conservative then that means you can
write
f as the gradient of a potential
so that would mean that f would equal
the gradient
of some potential phi so let's suppose
it
is and then show that phi can't possibly
exist
so if this was true then the first
component
of our gradient would be the phi by dx
and the second one would be d phi
d y so now we've got
d phi by dx has to be
equal to x minus y
and we also know that d5 by dy
has to be equal to x y
so we solve both of these pdes the first
one if we integrate with respect to x
we get uh phi is a half x squared
minus x times y
and then plus some function f
of y because if i differentiate this i
get back to
d5 by dx and then over here this one
tells us
that phi is equal to x
y squared over 2 plus
some arbitrary function of x because
again if i differentiate
this the two comes down i get x y and
the g of x disappears
and then if you compare these two
functions both of them must be true
if such a phi exists but we're going to
run into trouble
so this has to be g of x
[Music]
this term doesn't actually appear over
there
and then our f of y is actually just
zero
but the problem we've got is that this
term is not the same as this
so this is a big old contradiction
such a phi cannot exist therefore f is
not
conservative for the second part of the
question we're asked to calculate
the integral around c of f
dot d r so this is a line integral
f is given by this function and c
is going to be as explained in the
question
the semicircle traversed
anti-clockwise so that way
from this point two to this point of
minus two
so this is x squared plus y squared
equals four
uh so this point must be two as well
so we want to calculate the line
integral of f
around this curve it's a closed curve
so if f was conservative this would be
zero
but we've just shown that f isn't
conservative so we're expecting a
non-zero answer
now to calculate that we have to
parameterize
our curve c so i'm going to split it up
into c1
which is the semicircular arc and then
i'm going to call the straight line
c2 now on c1
what have we got well we need to have a
semicircle need to parameterize this
so we can parameterize that with one
parameter
so you write it as r of t
is equal to the x component which is
going to be
2 cos of t and then the y component is
going to be 2
sine of t because
if we now do x squared plus y squared
we get 4 cos squared plus 4 sine squared
is 4. so it's exactly this curve
and this will be for t going from 0 to
pi
[Music]
and then along c2 our parameterization
r of t so x
is increasing x just increases from -2
to 2 along a straight line
so x is t whilst y remains at zero
because the value of y doesn't change
along that straight line along the x
axis so we just have that where t
now goes from uh belongs to
-2 to 2.
so now we've parameterized our two
curves you just plug these two things
into our integral so
the integral will give us the following
two pieces
the first one will be the integral from
zero to pi now
the first term in f is x minus y so
that's just
2 cos of t minus 2 sine of t
cos t minus 2 sine t
comma x times y so that's just 4
cos t sine t
and then we've got dotted with d r
so that means do d r by dt and then put
the dt at the end
that's kind of how we do that so you
just differentiate cos if you
differentiate cars you get minus sign
and then we differentiate sine to get
cars
and then we just write dt at the end
so for the curve along c one
the arc we have to just do this dot
product
which gives us lots and lots of
trigonometric functions
and then we're going to integrate them
and then for the curve along c
two is now going from minus 2 to 2
x minus y so that's just t
x times y that's zero and then that's
dotted with dr
so dr by dt is one zero
and then we write the dt at the end so
now we've got the setup of the problem
we just need to do the dot product and
then do the trigonometric
integral and then do this much simpler
integral because this is just the
integral of t
between -2 and 2. so this one actually
will give us zero
and if you can't see that then you can
just do the integral yourself and you'll
see it gives you zero
and then the trigonometric part
will give us non-zero answer because we
said it's not conservative we expect it
to not
be zero and it turns out that the whole
thing
gives you two pi so
i reckon the answer to part two is two
pi
so question four was probably my
favorite on this whole exam so i had a
lot of fun figuring this one out
so we're told that we have several
variables xj which are all between
zero and one we're told that the sum
from j equals one to n of these
variables
is equal to one and we're also told that
we're interested in the function
s which is minus the sum
from j equals one to n of x j
the natural log of x j
so some kind of entropy type function
and what we want to do is we want to
maximize
s subject to this
constraint so we want to find the
maximum value of
s where we are restricted by the total
of these xjs being one because if we
weren't restricted
then it's much the maximum is possibly
unbounded
but with this restriction we're going to
have to use lagrange
multipliers which is the method the
question suggests
so the trick is setting up the problem
correctly
so the way i do this is you say i want
to consider the function
f which is the thing i want to
maximize or minimize so here this
so that's equal to s and then
minus lambda times my constraint
g so my constraint g is given by
this up here where we say that g
is defined to be the sum of the xjs
minus one so we are defining our
constraint
to be equal to zero so you just ever so
slightly rearrange
the the constraint that you're given in
the question
now with this is our g and this is our s
we plug everything in and this just
turns into
minus the sum of xj
log of xj and then it's going to now be
minus
lambda times g which is the sum
of xjs minus one
and the way lagrange multipliers work is
we solve df
by dxj so you differentiate with respect
to
each variable and you need that to be
equal to
zero and you also solve the f
by d lambda
equal to zero
now df by d lambda equaling zero when
you do
df by d lambda you're just left with
that bracket
so this is actually just the same as
g equals naught so this just make sure
you remember your constraint
now these equations
we can consider this for each j but if
we just fix
j at some arbitrary number we can see
what's going to happen by just
differentiating
so when we do the derivative what i'm
going to get is i'm going to hit
the xj and get minus log
and then it's a product rule so then
that's going to now be
plus the derivative of
log of xj times xj
log of xj gives me 1 over xj
multiplied by xj gives me one so with
the minus sign that's then minus
one and then here i've got a sum of the
xj's so x1 plus x2 plus x3 plus dot
dot xj plus dot dot dot xn so when i
differentiate expect xj
this will just give me minus lambda
because there's just a single linear
term in xj
from that sum and this is equal to zero
and this is true for all j
so what we now have is an expression
for the xjs which is true for each j
and we have our constraint which is up
here that the sum of the xjs must be one
so this we can solve for the xjs what
we're going to do is rearrange
and then take the exponential so that
will tell you
that xj for each j
is just e to the minus 1 minus lambda
and that's true for no matter what j we
have
that's always true and now lambda
remember is a parameter we introduced
so we can't give our answer in terms of
lander
so we actually go back and use the
constraint or use this bit
here to solve for lambda so if each
xj is the same and it's just given by
this
when i sum n of them because this is j
equals one to n remember
when i sum n of them i'm going to get
by my constraint the n lots
of e to the minus one minus lambda
must be what so now i divide through by
n on both sides
take logs rearrange for lambda
and that actually tells you that lambda
is
equal to log of n minus
1. so this gives you
lambda log of n
minus one so that goes back into your
formula for xj
and when you simplify everything the xjs
are actually just equal to 1 over n
so to maximize the value of s
given by this function here you just
plug in
x j is equal to 1 over n
for each xj thank you tom
next up is the fifth exercise we have
some function given and it's graphical
representation as a surface
s and three dimensional space and the
curves r one and r two
are given by some vectors basically both
lie on s
and pass through the point p being equal
to zero one one
calculate the equation of the tangent
plane of f of x at p
give the answer in the scalar form ax
plus b y plus c
set is equal to d so so the way to go
here is to find at first our tangent
vectors this is basically the algorithm
units you go through
to find the tangent vectors at first you
want to find out what values for t
and you you need to plug in such that r1
and r2
are going to be equal to our point p
being equal to zero one one so let us
rewrite r1 at first
which is nothing but t squared and then
t plus one
and at the variant two t plus 1. and
let's see for which values of t
we are going to find out when this is
equal to 0
1 1 and this is fairly straightforward i
mean t squared can only be equal to 0.
it's an eat important if
t is equal to 0 in the first part
meaning we need to have
t being equal to zero next up we need
t to be equal to zero yet again and at
the very end we need to set
t being equal to zero once again to get
ourselves
well just the point p and now for the
second vector
r2 we need to find the value for u which
is going to
result in our point p yet again
so which value for u is going to result
in this vector let us take a look at the
zero component i
i mean we just need to solve u to the
third power minus one is equal to zero
at one on both sides u to the third
power is equal to one
meaning you must be equal to one meaning
this is going to result in 1 1
1 probably let's check for the other
components if we plug in the second
component one this fits okay one is
equal to one
and plugging one into the less component
one minus one is zero plus one is going
to give us one
so this right here does hold and now we
can proceed to find the tangent vectors
meaning
just as always to find the slope or the
tangent at a certain point we are going
to differentiate
our vectors component wise meaning we
are going to differentiate r1 with
respect to t on each and every component
and r2 with respect to u
on each and every component and then we
are going to plug in the values for u
and t
respectively that we just found out so t
being equal to zero and u being equal to
one
and then we find out what our tangent
vectors must be so t squared is going to
turn into two t and then we are going to
have
one and at the end two and plugging this
in for t
being equal to zero this is going to
result in zero one and two that's right
here's our first vector very
straightforward and you can do the same
thing for u
now that we are done with those vectors
we just need to take them into a cross
product
and all that's left to do after that is
to plug our
cross product vector basically into our
equation so each and every component are
going to be the coefficients a b
c and we are going to possibly get a d
out
after doing some manipulations and also
we need to subtract from each and every
x y and z
component the components of our vector p
that we had at the beginning our point p
and just a basic algorithm to get all of
this done
like mentioned before our components of
the cross product are just going to be
our coefficients of our planar equation
basically
so meaning we are going to get negative
3 times and now
x minus the first component of our
point p which is zero now we are going
to continue with this process plus six
is the next coefficient times y and then
we had
negative one overall and last but not
least we are going to have negative 3
times z minus 1 being equal to 0. and
now we can
factor everything out and then bring
stuff to the other side and this is
going to result in our answer
question 6 gives us a function of two
variables
f of x y which is going to be
equal to
[Music]
x y minus x
plus y minus 1
times e to the minus x y
and we're asked to find the maximum and
minimum values
of this function on a particular domain
and the domain we're interested in
is a triangle with vertices
at minus one zero
another vertex minus one one up here
minus one one and the other vertex
on the y-axis so that's gonna be at zero
one so we join them up to form this
right
angled triangle and then on that domain
we want to find the max and the min
of this function fortunately i made a
very recent video on exactly how to
solve
problems like this because here we're
trying to find the critical points
the max and the min of a function of
several
variables and we do this by solving for
the gradient of
f or its two partial derivatives equal
to zero so if we calculate d df by dx
first so i make that
to be uh we're going to do a product
rule
and get y minus 1 times the exponential
and then it's going to be plus the big
bracket
x y minus x plus y minus 1
and then times the derivative of the
exponential minus y
e to the minus x y and then we do
something very similar
for d f by d y
and that gives you x plus one
e to the minus x y plus
big bracket
times minus x e
minus x y and we want both of these to
be zero
at a max or a min or possibly a saddle
now for both of these to be true
we can first of all say that the
exponential clearly is never zero
so that cancels uh from both terms
and then we've just got now two
polynomials in x and y
that both have to be equal to zero so we
can solve both of those
simultaneously to find the values of x
and y that make this
possible so we can actually rewrite this
first equation
as y minus 1
squared is equal to x y
times 1 minus y just tidying up the
equation a little bit
and the second equation becomes x plus 1
squared equals y
times x times x plus
1. so now it's much easier to see how to
solve this system of equations
because here we can either have that y
is one
and then that would make both sides of
the equation zero
and here we could have x as minus one
would make both sides of the equation
zero and there are other possible
solutions that would
also work but when you check them all
it turns out that in this triangle
it's just those two that i mentioned
that actually give you a critical point
within
the triangle so you can check all of the
others but they're just not within that
triangle
so within our domain the only critical
point
which we don't yet know if it's a
maximin or a saddle but the only
critical point occurs when y
is one and when x is minus one
so we know that when y is one
x is minus one we have a critical point
now if you plug those values into f
f at that point at minus one one
so up here it actually has the value
zero so you sub in
you get that that's zero so again we
still don't know if it's a max or a min
but if you also consider f at minus one
zero and f at zero and one it's also
equal to the value zero so it turns out
that this is actually a maximum
point and you can check this using the
method of the discriminant
which i also talk about in a recent
video
or by calculating second derivatives and
various other things
so this is in fact the maximum value of
f
on this domain and it occurs all the way
along this edge
and along this edge as well as at this
corner point
and then the function itself with a
little bit of thought by looking at it
and considering the range of values of x
and y
what's actually happening with the
function is you have the value
zero along these edges and then it kind
of slopes down
away from that point so the function is
very much
decreasing away from all of those
both of those edges so the function's
kind of sloping away
and so the minimum value is actually
going to occur
here at minus a half a half
so f at minus a half a half
which when you plug in those numbers
you'll find is equal to
minus e to the one quarter
is the min value
now number seven is one exercise that
i'm pretty familiar with this
is just um dropping a ball or a
mass or whatever from a certain height
okay with air resistance
so basically a force is going to act on
this ball this is why we have this
m times a term right here and this is
equal to two forces
going against the main force okay which
is going to be the gravitational force
and then we have some damping term
because we have some air molecules
going against our mass meaning we are
going to have damping involved
and the first exercise tells us to
calculate the solution for x of t
subject to the initial conditions x not
being equal to
h and x dot not is equal to zero
and for this you can use various methods
i'm going to present you the outlines of
one
and then you can go through all the
calculations yourself so at first i
would like to divide
by m on both sides here on this equation
leaving us with
x double dot being hence nothing but and
then we are going to have negative
g and then plus k
divided by m times x dot and
you can basically at first solve a
homogeneous equation and after that you
can go ahead
and solve the p for the particular
solution of the differential equation
getting yourself the
general solution to the differential
equation but you can actually make it
easier
by doing a change of variable here so
what you're going to say is
that our x dot is nothing but z this
means if we differentiate both sides
with respect to t we are going to get
that z dot is nothing but
x double dot meaning this is going to
result in a reduced order differential
equation
namely we're going to have that z dot is
hence nothing but negative
g k so plus k divided by m
times set and now we can divide both
sides by this term leaving us overall
with set dot divided by negative
g plus k over m times z
being equal to one and now we can just
integrate both sides with respect to t
and then you can go through the whole
process leaving you in the process with
some function set with respect to t
okay just integrating both sides this is
how differential equations work
being equal to something exponential
term definitely this is going to result
in an exponential term because you are
going to get a logarithm out on this
side
in some way a logarithm or something and
then you exponentiate both sides
leaving you with some kind of e-snack
basically just some constant multiplied
with an exponential term
um probably k divided by m times x
in in some way no t not x um plus some
arbitrary constant c
and then you can go ahead and say okay
set of t was nothing but your x dot and
then you can just integrate both sides
yet again
to get yourself to find the expression
for x with respect to t
it's very straightforward it's really
easy to separate and solve this
differential equation and then you can
just plug in the initial conditions
meaning in each and every t you are
going to block in zero you are always
you are already going to have the the
equation for your x dot right here
making everything way easier
meaning x dot of 0 is going to result in
just this constant plus this constant
basically
and then you can go ahead and just solve
for the initial value problem
second part of the exercise says that
you have to determine an algebraic
equation for the time taken for the
particle to fall to earth and calculate
an expression for the impact velocity
this is also extremely straightforward
let's go
through the process a tiny little bit
meaning we are going to have an initial
height h
right here where the ball is going to
fall down basically our mass m
on a height h what is going to happen if
we hit
the earth what is with the height h i
mean height h
is going to be zero when it hits the
earth
meaning we are going to just say that
h is going to be equal to zero in our
problem that we already saw
for the initial values meaning you are
going to take a look at x of t
where h is equal to zero and then you
are just going to separate for t
once you have solved for t you are going
to go into this equation of
x dot and then basically just you just
plug your t
in and then you can basically get
yourself the algebraic
equation okay if this right here is our
t naught
for the time it falls to the earth
you're just going to plug the t not in
and then you are going to get another
solution for an initial value problem
solving for the velocity in the process
and this concludes the exercise now off
to number eight
now number eight is actually fairly easy
at least the first part so we have to
prove the inequality something something
and consider what happens when both
sides of the
inequality are squared so in the normal
case
if you square both sides of an
inequality for example if you have
negative cases negative 3
is less than negative 2 and if you
square both sides you're going to get
9 and 4. ah okay all the relation is
going to change
but if we have positive values for
example 3 is greater than 2. if you
square both sides then we have 9
is greater than 4 obviously meaning if
both sides of an
order relation are actually greater than
or greater or equal to zero then we can
square both sides
and the order relation really doesn't
change and this is the case i mean our
third is
strictly positive okay obviously since
um
it it can be complex that is strictly
greater a negative one
and this part right here by this
condition that we're having here is
obviously
also positive because z over two is even
if we have the lowest case like negative
one
basically we're going to get just
positive one half and
higher we go okay and the more positives
is going to stay positive
meaning if we square both sides we're
going to get one plus set
is less or equal to um okay and by the
binomial we are going to get one
plus set plus set squared over four
and now you might notice something
namely that one plus seven one plus z is
going to cancel out
meaning what we have to prove is zero is
great or equal to set squared over four
and obviously this holds doesn't matter
which value for set you
are going to plug in you're going to
have that set squared divided by 4 is
going to be positive because set squared
is a squared and by definition it's
going to be positive
now next we are going to use the
inequality
in one to construct an epsilon delta
proof for this
multivariable metric limit okay
and one good thing here is students
didn't really need to remember all of
this because there was actually a cheat
sheet
coming with this exam and they actually
put the epsilon delta definition into
here which i find to be very generous of
you thank you very much lecturer
and basically we are going to take a
look
at what happens with our metric with our
euclidean metric here in this definition
and then we are going to use the
inequality to kind of conclude a delta
for us like a upper bound basically
okay so in in our metric right right
here we are going to plug in what
happens when a and b
are going to be be plugged into here now
a and b are 0 and 0 meaning our metric
in our process is going to turn into the
square root of x squared plus 2 r
squared this is something that we need
to
use later in the process um here was my
thought process when constructing the
epsilon basically so for this we need to
take a look at our function f
minus our limit l but our limit l is
going to be equal to zero so the
absolute value of our function is going
to be the absolute value
of what we have here so the square root
of 1 plus
4x squared plus 2y squared
minus 1 divided by square root of 4x
squared plus 2y
squared and my fault process here i
didn't go through the whole thing
so my initial thought was to use the
approximation
here on this step already because this
term that we're having up here is of the
form
1 plus something meaning this right here
by our definition that we are having
here is going to be less or equal to the
absolute value of
okay our one is going to stay here plus
and then we are
just going to take what's in parentheses
over two so meaning this is going to
turn into two x squared
plus y squared minus 1 divided by square
root of 4x squared
plus 2r squared 1 and negative 1 is
going to cancel out and now you can
proceed
and use this rationalizing of the
denominator trick basically we are going
to multiply top and bottom by
the square root of 4 x squared plus 2 r
squared
really doesn't matter if you have
absolute values here because the third
is being defined positive
and if we were to multiply everything
out we are going to get
and one thing you might notice is that
this and this factor is going to cancel
out leaving you with the square root of
four x squared plus two r squared
over two and then you can probably
proceed and make use of what we have
found out here in the metric
as the delta and probably use it to
finish up the proof
and once you're done with the proof at
some point don't forget to
as always use your absolutely
magnificent easy stamp
you can find it on stem urge ninth
exercise
is one i'm not too familiar with anymore
non-linear dynamics
was quite a while ago but i'm still
going to give it a shot
so we have to look at the equation given
with harvesting
and we have to identify all the fixed
points equilibrium positions
fixed points means we want to find
solutions
p star which are constant okay
this is just some p with respect to
some time and if we were to
differentiate a fixed point since p
star is nothing but a constant we are
going to look for solutions of
dp dt being equal to zero meaning we are
just going to set
this equation equal to zero and then we
are going to solve for all the
equilibrium
positions meaning this right here is
going to turn into a
second order equation a second order
polynomial second degree one
and where you can just solve it
regularly and then you are going to get
yourself two fixed points and in the
next step we have to identify
all the fixed points or equilibrium
solutions which are stable and you have
to justify your answer
and like i said just now you are going
to get two fixed points p1
and p2 and for the logistic equation it
is mostly the case that only one of
those
two is going to be a stable one so in
the normal case you are probably going
to draw yourself some kind of graph
and then you are going to have a graph
like this where we have
this one fixed point right here and the
second fixed point
and basically we are going to have
something like this given no this one
right here should be
okay by just argumentations that you
find in nonlinear dynamics
i can go into too much more detail right
here because it would take ages to
explain
this right here is going to result in an
unstable fixed point
and this right here is going to be a
stable fixed point but we can also have
the other situation
namely our third cannot be imaginary
this is not something that is going to
uh our discriminant can be a
negative meaning our certs can't be
really imaginary this just has to do
with the fact that our population size
would then be negative which really
doesn't work meaning we only need to
consider the cases when we have
two states p1 and p2 or when p1 and p2
are equal meaning our discriminant is
equal to zero if those two are equal we
are going to have one
fixed point and this fixed point
should be an unstable one
once again and you can probably just
argue using this
those diagrams that those are stable and
unstable fixed points
this is how you go about something like
this most
of the time but you can also justify
your answer using
limits basically by finding out how your
differential equation your non-linear
one
acts under those fixed points and then
find out what happens in the limit
and the last exercise here is going to
be if we plug in two values
so for r and k we want to find out for
which value of h does a bifurcation
occur
and bifurcation basically just means in
one or two dimensions
that we want to see when the stability
of some fixed points are going to change
meaning what we can do is we can for
example
track those fixed points downwards and
turn in stable fixed point which was
here
into an unstable fixed point this is
something that could happen
meaning what we are going to do is we
are going to find some value
h for which p1 and p2
are going to be equal and thus the
stability is going to change because we
know that this right here is going to be
an unstable fixed point
but this right here before was a stable
fixed point and then the bifurcation
does occur
this is just the case for logistic maps
basically
and yeah this is the process you need to
go through and this right here really
involves heavy calculations
finally for question 10 we are given the
solution to a homogeneous
differential equation and then asked to
solve a
very very similar inhomogeneous
differential equation
now the way this works is as follows
we are given the solution to y double
prime
plus eight t y prime
plus 4 times 4
t squared plus 1 times
y equals 0. and we're told
a solution to this is y
equals e to the minus 2
t squared so this is a possible solution
to this
equation now the question says to use
the method of the reduction of
order to solve the inhomogeneous
equation so what that means is you try a
solution
y equals u of t
where u is at the moment an unknown
function
multiplied by our known solution
e to the minus 2 t squared so now you
calculate y
prime which i'll do this one that's u
prime e to the minus 2 t squared
so product rule then it's going to be
minus four t
times u e minus two
t squared and then we also calculate y
double prime
i will leave that as dot dot dot
and then you plug all of those into the
equation
and what actually will happen because of
this method of reduction of order
we just get back something very very
simple so when you sub in
you actually just get
that u double prime
is zero and that's it so now you solve
this
and say well u is clearly just a linear
function
a t plus b and so therefore
the most general solution
is a t plus b
times e to the minus two
t squared so we have the most general
solution
y equals a t plus b e to the minus two t
squared for the homogeneous differential
equation
but we're asked to solve the
inhomogeneous one where this is equal to
e to the minus 2 t squared
times cos of t
so as with most odes what we need to do
is take our homogeneous solution and
add on the particular solution which
solves the equation equal to e to the
minus 2t squared
cos so for that you try
another solution which is going to be
equal to
c times cos of t plus d
times sine of t times e
to the minus 2 t squared and what you
want to do
again is calculate y prime
equals dot dot calculate y double prime
these are really annoying to do so leave
that one as an exercise to the viewer
and then substitute those into this and
now
evaluating it equal to e to the minus 2t
squared cos of t
and when you equate the coefficients
you'll see that your c
here c must actually be minus one
and d must be zero
so your overall solution is the
homogeneous one
plus the particular solution we found
down
here and so the very final solution is
y equals a t plus b e to the minus two t
squared
minus cos of t
e so minus 2 t squared
and this basically concludes the
outlines of
all the exercises and now after looking
through all the exercises you might
already
know why so many people failed in the
first place thing is
if you're a first-year student and you
never did any kind of
exam during your your university life at
all it's going to pose a real problem to
you if you
want to try to solve 10 of those
questions which
just involve so much heavy computation
in two hours that's that's really hard
to do
i can understand why so many people fail
and even if you're
a winner in the imo it doesn't mean that
you are fast as
at problem solving and getting all the
computations done and
and this is something i can really
understand and
in order of to make not too many
students fail so to get
a passable rate of students actually
completing this exam
the lecturer had to downgrade from 40
marks that you would need to possibly
get to pass
to 25 roughly so he really put a nice
spicy curvature to this whole thing to
make at least
some students finish this up which is
really crazy 25
in an exam is not much that you need to
get
in order to pass so he really had to um
yeah adjust the curvature by huge margin
and i respect that thank you professor
for making at least some students pass
but give them more time please don't
don't put in so many exercises and give
them more time
they are first years they are not used
to doing exams like they
have to do at university it's just not
something they do on a regular basis so
please
be a bit more chill at the start of
university don't
don't um let them leave okay at the
start they want to become something so
give them the chance to become something
and this basically concludes the video
for today but before you end watching
the video don't forget to check out
today's sponsor pre and
we're kind enough to sponsor yet another
heart exam video
here on this channel
today's exam was one of a different kind
covering essential knowledge from the
first 10 years of school
and a massive amount of various
university level topics as
easy as some of the questions might seem
to math enthusiasts like us
under the circumstances that they were
presented with students considered these
questions to be really challenging
we all started out small ones so never
forget your fundamentals
if you are interested in brushing up on
important topics or clever math calculus
and high analysis
i encourage you to try out brilliant
today besides the awesome selection of
various problems in mathematics geometry
physics and many more topics brienne
provides their subscribers with
dedicated single and multivariable
calculus courses
as well as differential equations it
covers the most basic and important math
topics to really get you prepared for
your next exam
or upcoming studies i don't know if you
already thought about
your new year's resolutions but if you
haven't done so already then
definitely consider to get yourself a
premium subscription for brilliant
because one of those new year's
resolutions could be that you would like
to
learn a new topic for example one new
year's resolution
i want to learn a new topic in various
mathematic topics
once per month this month i want to
learn multivariable calculus
next month i want to learn about linear
algebra all those topics one after
another brushing up on all the most
important fundamentals one after another
and there's something i encourage you to
do and if you want to really
get yourself some new year's resolutions
that you could really benefit from that
make sure to check out the link at the
top of the description
with it you can already access brilliant
for completely free
okay at least a big portion of it and
the first 200 people to actually
actually use the link get 20
of it in your premium subscription so
definitely try it out and support the
channel this way
if it enjoyed this video then please
like subscribe my comment channel like
don't forget to also subscribe to my boy
tom crawford
who was kind enough to um create yet
another video here for this channel
together with me and i
really enjoyed um his participation in
this video
and yeah definitely subscribe to him
link to his channel at the top of the
description
after that don't forget to check out
sandwich and aventin next video okay
guys of limbo day
please share the video if you didn't
enjoy it ciao
[Music]
you